Added an updated page on randomness (#125)
w3f/polkadot-wiki: docs/learn-randomness.md

sidebar_label: Randomness
---

> Randomness in Proof of Stake blockchains is important for a fair and unpredictable distribution of validator responsibilities. Because computers are deterministic (the same input always produces the same output), they are bad at random numbers. Additionally, general random numbers as found in common applications are pseudo-random as they depend on a sufficiently random _seed_ provided by the user or another type of _oracle_, like a [weather station for atmospheric noise](https://www.random.org/randomness/), [your heart rate](https://mdpi.altmetric.com/details/47574324), or even [lava lamps](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Lavarand).

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Randomness in Proof of Stake blockchains is important for a fair and unpredictable distribution of validator responsibilities. Computers are bad at random numbers because they are deterministic devices (the same input always produces the same output). Another complication is that general random numbers that are commonly used in applications are pseudo-random and they depend on a sufficiently random _seed_ provided by the user or another type of _oracle_, like a [weather station for atmospheric noise](https://www.random.org/randomness/), [your heart rate](https://mdpi.altmetric.com/details/47574324), or even [lava lamps](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Lavarand).
```

These inputs will vary based on time and space, however, and it would be impossible to get the same result into all the nodes of a particular blockchain around the world. If nodes get different inputs on which to build blocks, forks happen. Obviously, real-world entropy is not suitable for use as a seed for blockchain randomness.

There are two main approaches to blockchain randomness in production today: RANDAO and VRF. Polkadot uses VRF.

## VRF

> A verifiable random function is a mathematical operation which for some input produces as output a random number, and proof that this random number was generated by the submitter. This proof can be verified by any challenger to make sure the random number roll was indeed valid.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
A verifiable random function is a mathematical operation that takes some input and produces a random number along with a proof of authenticity that this random number was generated by the submitter. The proof can be verified by any challenger to ensure the random number generation is valid.
```

> The VRF used in Polkadot is roughly the same as the one used in Ouroboros Praos. Ouroboros randomness is secure for block production and works well for BABE. Where they differ is that Polkadot's VRF does not depend on a central clock (the problem becomes - whose central clock?), rather, it depends on its own past results to determine present and future results, and it uses slot numbers as a clock emulator, estimating time. Here's how it works in detail.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
The VRF used in Polkadot is roughly the same as the one used in Ouroboros Praos. Ouroboros randomness is secure for block production and works well for BABE. Where they differ is that Polkadot's VRF does not depend on a central clock (the problem becomes - whose central clock?), rather, it depends on its own past results to determine present and future results, and it uses slot numbers as a clock emulator, estimating time.

Here's how it works in detail:
```

> Slots are discrete units of time six seconds in length. Each slot can contain a block, but doesn't have to. The aim is to have block times at six seconds too, so in theory every slot should have a block. Slots make up epochs - specifically, 2400 slots make one epoch, which makes epochs four hours long.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Slots are discrete units of time six seconds in length. Each slot can contain a block, but may not. Slots make up epochs - on Kusama, 2400 slots make one epoch, which makes epochs four hours long.
```

In every slot, each validator "rolls a die". They execute a function (the VRF) which takes as input the following:

> - the "secret key", a key specifically made for these die rolls and which gets regenerated in every new slot

Reviewer: ```suggestion
- **The "secret key"**, a key specifically made for these die rolls and which gets regenerated in every new slot.
```

> - the hash of VRF values from the blocks in the epoch before last (N-2), so past randomness has an effect on the current pending randomness (N)

Reviewer: ```suggestion
- **The hash of VRF values from the blocks in the epoch before last (N-2)**, so past randomness has an effect on the current pending randomness (N).
```

> - the slot number

Reviewer: ```suggestion
- **The slot number.**
```

sidebar_label: Randomness
---

> Randomness in Proof of Stake blockchains is important for a fair and unpredictable distribution of validator responsibilities. Computers are bad at random numbers because they are deterministic devices (the same input always produces the same output). Another complication is that general random numbers that are commonly used in applications are pseudo-random and they depend on a sufficiently random _seed_ provided by the user or another type of _oracle_, like a [weather station for atmospheric noise](https://www.random.org/randomness/), [your heart rate](https://mdpi.altmetric.com/details/47574324), or even [lava lamps](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Lavarand).

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
Randomness in Proof of Stake blockchains is important for a fair and unpredictable distribution of validator responsibilities. Computers are bad at random numbers because they are deterministic devices (the same input always produces the same output).   What people usually call random numbers on a computer, such as in a gaming application, are actually _pseudo-random_ - that is, they depend on a sufficiently random _seed_ provided by the user or another type of _oracle_, like a [weather station for atmospheric noise](https://www.random.org/randomness/), [your heart rate](https://mdpi.altmetric.com/details/47574324), or even [lava lamps](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Lavarand), from which it can generate a series of seemingly-random numbers.  But given the same seed, the same sequence will always be generated.
```

Reviewer 2: Just wanted to clarify this a bit.

Author: You and your double spaces :D

The VRF used in Polkadot is roughly the same as the one used in Ouroboros Praos. Ouroboros randomness is secure for block production and works well for BABE. Where they differ is that Polkadot's VRF does not depend on a central clock (the problem becomes - whose central clock?), rather, it depends on its own past results to determine present and future results, and it uses slot numbers as a clock emulator, estimating time.

Here's how it works in detail:

Slots are discrete units of time six seconds in length. Each slot can contain a block, but may not. Slots make up epochs - on Kusama, 2400 slots make one epoch, which makes epochs four hours long.

In every slot, each validator "rolls a die". They execute a function (the VRF) which takes as input the following:

- **The "secret key"**, a key specifically made for these die rolls and which gets regenerated in every new slot.
- **The hash of VRF values from the blocks in the epoch before last (N-2)**, so past randomness has an effect on the current pending randomness (N).
- **The slot number.**

![](assets/VRF_babe.png)

> The output is two values: a `RESULT` and a `PROOF`.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
The output is two values: a `RESULT` (the random value) and a `PROOF` (a proof that the random value was generated correctly).
```

> The `RESULT` is then compared to a _threshold_ defined in the implementation of the protocol (specifically, in the Polkadot Runtime Environment currently being built by Parity). If the value is less than the threshold, then the validator who rolled this number is a viable block production candidate for that slot. The validator then attempts to create a block and submits this block into the network along with the previously obtained `PROOF` and `RESULT`. 

Reviewer 2: There can - and will - be more PREs (created by e.g. Soramitsu and Chainsafe).  Maybe get rid of the Parity reference, although they are the only ones who have actually produced one so far?

Author: ```suggestion
The `RESULT` is then compared to a _threshold_ defined in the implementation of the protocol (specifically, in the Polkadot Runtime Environment). If the value is less than the threshold, then the validator who rolled this number is a viable block production candidate for that slot. The validator then attempts to create a block and submits this block into the network along with the previously obtained `PROOF` and `RESULT`. 
```

Author: Reason was that I asked around where the threshold is defined and _no one_ knows, not even the Parity devs I could reach. But yeah, sounds better without it.

Reviewer: https://github.com/paritytech/substrate/blob/master/core/consensus/babe/src/authorship.rs#L30

Author: Nice!

Author: Is this specced anywhere? How will other implementers know?

Reviewer: It should be in the BABE paper / research and also in the PRE specification.

> The fishermen - the nodes watching the network for collator and validator wrongdoing - will be verifying relay chain blocks. Since an illegal roll will generate an illegal block, and since fishermen will have access to the `RESULT` and `PROOF` in every block produced by a validator, it'll be easy for them to automatically report cheating validators.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
The fishermen - nodes watching the network for collator and validator wrongdoing - will be verifying relay chain blocks. Since an illegal roll will generate an illegal block, and since fishermen will have access to the `RESULT` and `PROOF` in every block produced by a validator, it'll be easy for them to automatically report cheating validators.
```
